<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_6" name="CHAPTER_6"></a>CHAPTER 6</h2>
<p>"That bird of Lurgha's—" said Ross, once they were out of sight of
Cassca and Lal, "could it have been a plane?"</p>
<p>"Sounds like it," snapped his companion. "If the Reds have done their
work efficiently, and there's no reason to suppose otherwise, then there
is no use in contacting either Dorhta's town or Munga's. The same
announcement concerning the Wrath of Lurgha was probably made there—to
their good purpose, not ours."</p>
<p>"Cassca didn't seem to be overly impressed with Lurgha's curse, not as
much as the man was."</p>
<p>"She is the closest thing to a priestess that this tribe knows, and she
serves a goddess older and more powerful than Lurgha—the Mother Earth,
the Great Mother, goddess of fertility and growth. Nodren's people
believe that unless Cassca performs her mysteries and sows part of the
first field in the spring there won't be any harvest. Consequently, she
is secure in her office and doesn't fear the Wrath of Lurgha too much.
These people are now changing from one type of worship to another, but
some of Cassca's beliefs will persist clear down to our day,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_71" name="Page_71">[Pg 71]</a></span> taking on
the coating of 'magic' and a lot of other enameling along the way."</p>
<p>Ashe had been talking as a man talks to cover up furious thinking. Now
he paused again and turned toward the sea. "We have to stick it out
somewhere until the sub comes to pick us up. We'll need shelter."</p>
<p>"Will the tribesmen be after us?"</p>
<p>"They may well be. Let the right men get to talking up a holy
extermination of those upon whom the Wrath of Lurgha has fallen and we
could be in for plenty of trouble. Some of those men are trained hunters
and trackers, and the Reds may have planted an agent to report the
return of anyone to our post. Just now we're about the most important
time travelers out, for we know the Reds have appeared on this line.
They must have a large post here, too, or they couldn't have sent a
plane on that raid. You can't build a time transport large enough to
take through a considerable amount of material. Everything used by us in
this age has to be assembled on this side, and the use of all machines
is limited to where they can not be seen by any natives. Luckily large
sections of this world are mostly wilderness and unpopulated in the
areas where we operate the base posts. So if the Reds have a plane, it
was put together here, and that means a big post somewhere." Again Ashe
was thinking aloud as he pushed ahead of Ross into the fringes of a
wood. "Sandy and I scouted this territory pretty well last spring. There
is a cave about half a mile to the west; it will shelter us for
tonight."</p>
<p>Ashe's plans would probably have been easily accomplished if the cave
had been unoccupied. Without incident they came down into a hollow
through which trickled a small stream, its banks laced with a thin
edging of ice. Under Ashe's direction Ross collected an armload of
firewood. He was no woodsman<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_72" name="Page_72">[Pg 72]</a></span> and his prolonged exposure to the chilling
drizzle made him eager for even the very rough shelter of a cave, so
eager that he plunged forward carelessly. His foot came down on a
slippery patch of mud, sending him sprawling on his face. There was a
growl, and a white bulk rushed him. The cloak, rucked up about his
throat and shoulders, then saved his life, for only stout cloth was
caught between those fangs.</p>
<p>With a startled cry, Ross rolled as he might have to escape a man's
attack, struggling to unsheath his dagger. A white-hot flash of pain
scored his upper arm. The breath was driven out of him as a fight raged
over his prone body; he heard grunts, snarls, and was severely pommeled.
Then he was free as the bodies broke away. Shaken, he got to his knees.
A short distance away the fight was still in progress. He saw Ashe
straddle the body of a huge white wolf, his legs clamped about the
animal's haunches, his hooked arm under the beast's head, forcing it up
and back while his dagger rose and sank twice in the underparts of the
heaving body.</p>
<p>Ross held his own weapon ready. He leaped from a half crouch, and his
dagger sank cleanly home behind the short ribs. One of their blows must
have reached the animal's heart. With an almost human cry the wolf
stiffened convulsively. Then it was still. Ashe squatted near it,
methodically driving his dagger into the moist soil to clean the blade.</p>
<p>A red rivulet trickled down his thigh where the lower edge of his
kilt-tunic had been ripped up to the link belt. He was breathing hard,
but otherwise he was as composed as always. "These sometimes hunt in
pairs at this season," he observed. "Be ready with your bow—"</p>
<p>Ross strung his with the cord he had been keeping dry within the breast
folds of his tunic. He fitted an arrow to the string, grateful to be a
passable marksman. The slash on his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_73" name="Page_73">[Pg 73]</a></span> arm smarted in protest as he moved,
and he noted that Ashe did not try to get up.</p>
<p>"A bad one?" Ross indicated the blood now thickening into a stream along
Ashe's thigh.</p>
<p>Ashe pulled away the torn tunic and exposed a nasty looking gash on the
outside of his hip. He pressed his palm against the gaping wound and
motioned Ross to scout ahead. "See if the cave is clear. We can't do
anything until we know that."</p>
<p>Reluctantly Ross followed the stream until he found the cave, a
snug-looking place with an overhang to keep it dry. The unpleasant smell
of a lair hung about its mouth. He chose a stone from the stream,
chucked it into the dark opening, and waited. The stone rattled as it
struck an inner wall, but there was no other sound. A second stone from
a different angle followed the first, with the same results. Ross was
now certain that the cave was unoccupied. Once they were inside with a
fire going at the entrance, they could hope to keep it free of
intruders. A little heartened, he cast about a bit upstream and then
turned back to where he had left Ashe.</p>
<p>"No male?" the other greeted him. "This is a female, and she was close
to whelping—" He nudged the white wolf with his toe. His hands held a
pad of rags against his hip, and his face was shaded with pain.</p>
<p>"Nothing in the cave anyway. Let's see about this...." Ross laid aside
the bow and kneeled to examine Ashe's thigh wound. His own slash was
more of a smarting graze, but this tear was deep and ugly.</p>
<p>"Second plate—belt—" Ashe got the words out between set teeth, and
Ross clicked open the hidden recess in the other's bronze belt to bring
out a small packet. Ashe made a wry face as he swallowed three of the
pills within. Ross mashed another<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_74" name="Page_74">[Pg 74]</a></span> pill onto the bandage he prepared,
and when the last cumbersome fold was secure Ashe relaxed.</p>
<p>"Let us hope that works," he commented a little bleakly. "Now come here
where I can get my hands on you and let me see your scratch. Animal
bites can be a nasty business."</p>
<p>Bandaged in turn, with the bitterness of the anti-septo pill on his
tongue, Ross helped Ashe limp upstream to the cave. He left the older
man outside while he cleaned up the floor of the cave and then made his
companion as comfortable as he could on a bed of bracken. The fire Ross
had longed for was built. They stripped off their sodden clothing and
hung it to dry. Ross wrapped a bird he had shot in clay and tucked it
under the hot coals to be roasted.</p>
<p>They had surely had bad luck, he thought, but they were now undercover,
had a fire, and food of a sort. His arm ached, sharp pain shooting from
fingers to elbow when he moved it. Though Ashe made no complaint, Ross
gauged that the older man's discomfort was far worse than his own, and
he carefully hid all signs of his own twinges.</p>
<p>They ate the bird, saltless, and with their fingers. Ross savored each
greasy bite, licking his hands clean afterward while Ashe lay back on
the improvised bed, his face gaunt in the half light of the fire.</p>
<p>"We are about five miles from the sea here. There is no way of raising
our base now that Sandy's installation is gone. I'll have to lay up,
since I can't risk any more loss of blood. And you're not too good in
the woods—"</p>
<p>Ross accepted that valuation with a new humbleness. He was only too well
aware that if it had not been for Ashe, he and not the white wolf would
have died down in the valley. Yet a strange shyness kept him from trying
to put his thanks into words. The only kind of amends he could make for
the other's<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_75" name="Page_75">[Pg 75]</a></span> hurt was to provide hands, feet, and strength for the man
who did know what to do and how to do it.</p>
<p>"We'll have to hunt—" he ventured.</p>
<p>"Deer," Ashe caught him up. "But the marsh at the mouth of this stream
provides a better hunting ground than inland. If the wolf laired here
very long, she has already frightened away any large game. It isn't the
matter of food which bothers me——"</p>
<p>"It is being tied up here," Ross filled in for him with some daring.
"But look here, I'll take orders. This is your territory, and I'm green
at the game. You tell me what to do, and I'll do it the best that I
can." He glanced up to find Ashe surveying him intently, but as usual
there was no readable expression on the other's brown face.</p>
<p>"The first thing to do is get the wolf's hide," Ashe said briskly. "Then
bury the carcass. You'd better drag it up here to work on it. If her
mate is hanging around, he might try to jump you."</p>
<p>Why Ashe should think it necessary to acquire the wolf skin puzzled
Ross, but he asked no questions. His skinning task took four times as
long and was far from being the neat job the shock-haired man of the
record tape had accomplished. Ross had to wash himself off in the stream
before piling stones over the corpse in temporary burial. When he pulled
his bloody burden back to the cave, Ashe lay with his eyes closed. Ross
thankfully sat on his own pile of bracken and tried not to notice the
throbbing ache in his arm.</p>
<p>He must have fallen asleep, for when he roused it was to see Ashe crawl
over to mend the dying fire from their store of wood. Ross, angry at
himself, beat the other to the task.</p>
<p>"Get back," he said roughly. "This is my job. I didn't mean to fail."<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_76" name="Page_76">[Pg 76]</a></span></p>
<p>Surprisingly, Ashe settled back without a word, leaving Ross to sit by
the fire, a fire he was very glad to have a moment or so later when a
wailing howl sounded down-wind. If this was not the white wolf's mate,
then it was another of her kin who prowled the upper reaches of the
small valley.</p>
<p>The next day, having provided Ashe with a supply of firewood, Ross went
to try his luck in the marsh. The thick drizzle which had hung over the
land the day before was gone, and he faced a clear, bright morning,
though the breeze had an icy snap. But it was a good morning to be alive
and out in the open, and Ross's spirits rose.</p>
<p>He tried to put to use all the woodlore he had learned at the base. But
it was one thing to learn something academically and another to put that
learning into practice. He was uncomfortably certain that Ashe would not
have found his showing very good.</p>
<p>The marsh was a series of pools between rank growths of leafless willows
and coarse tufts of grass, with hillocks of firmer soil rising like
islands. Ross, approaching with caution, was glad of it, for from one of
those hillocks arose a trail of white smoke, and he saw a black blot
which was probably a rude hut. Why one should choose to live in the
midst of such country he could not guess, though it might be merely the
temporary camp of some hunter.</p>
<p>Ross also saw thousands of birds feeding greedily on the dried seed of
the marsh grasses, paddling in the pools, and setting up a clamor to
drive a man mad. They did not seem in the least disturbed by that
distant camper.</p>
<p>Ross had reason to be proud of his marksmanship that morning. He had in
his quiver perhaps half a dozen of the lighter shafts made for shooting
birds. In place of the finely chipped and wickedly barbed flint points
used for heavier<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_77" name="Page_77">[Pg 77]</a></span> game, these were tipped with needle-sharp, light bone
heads. He had a string of four birds looped together by their feet
within almost as many minutes. For the flocks rose in their first alarm
only to settle again to feast.</p>
<p>Then he knocked over a hare—a fat giant of its race—that stared at him
brazenly from a tussock. The hare kicked back into a pool in its death
struggle, however, and Ross was forced to leave cover to retrieve its
body. But he was alert and he stood up, dagger out and ready, to greet
the man who parted the bushes to watch him.</p>
<p>For a long minute gray eyes stared into brown ones, and then Ross noted
the other's bedraggled and tattered dress. The kilt-tunic smudged with
mud, scorched and charred along one edge, was styled like his own. The
fellow wore his hair fastened back with a band, unlike the topknot of
the local tribesman.</p>
<p>Ross, his dagger still ready, broke the silence first. "I am a believer
in the fire and the fashioned metal, the climbing sun, and the moving
water." He repeated the recognition speech of the Beakermen.</p>
<p>"The fire warms by the grace of Tulden, the metal is fashioned by the
mystery of the smith, the sun climbs without our aid, and who can stop
the water from running?" The stranger's voice was hoarse. Now that Ross
had time to examine him more closely he saw the dark bruise on his
exposed shoulder, the raw red mark of a burn running across the man's
broad chest. He dared to test his surmise concerning the other.</p>
<p>"I am of the kin of Assha. We returned to the hill——"</p>
<p>"Ashe!"</p>
<p>Not "Assha" but "Ashe!" Ross, though sure of that pronunciation, was
still cautious. "You are from the hill place, where Lurgha smote with
thunder and fire?"</p>
<p>The man slid his long legs across the log which had been his<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_78" name="Page_78">[Pg 78]</a></span> shelter.
The burn across his chest was not his only brand, for Ross noticed
another red stripe, puffed and fiery looking, which swelled the calf of
one leg. The man studied Ross closely, and then his fingers moved in a
sign which to the uninitiated native might have been one for the warding
off of evil, but which to Ross was the "thumbs up" of his own age.</p>
<p>"Sanford?"</p>
<p>At that name the man shook his head. "McNeil," he named himself. "Where
is Ashe?"</p>
<p>He might really be what he seemed, but on the other hand, he could be a
Red spy. Ross had not forgotten Kurt. "What happened?" he parried one
question with another.</p>
<p>"Bomb. The Reds must have spotted us, and we didn't have a chance. We
weren't expecting any trouble. I'd been down to see about a missing
burden donkey and was about halfway back up the hill when she hit. When
I came to I was all the way down the hill with part of the fort on top
of me. The rest.... Well, you saw the place, didn't you?"</p>
<p>Ross nodded. "What are you doing here?"</p>
<p>McNeil spread his hands in a tired little gesture. "I tried to talk to
Nodren, but they stoned me away. I knew that Ashe was coming through and
hoped to reach him when he hit the beach, but I was too late. Then I
figured he would pass here to make contact with the sub, so I was
waiting it out until I saw you. Where is Ashe?"</p>
<p>It all sounded logical enough. Still, with Ashe injured, Ross was taking
no chances. He pushed his dagger back into its sheath and picked up the
hare. "Stay here," he told McNeil, "I'll be back——"</p>
<p>"But—wait! Where's Ashe, you young fool? We have to get together."</p>
<p>Ross went on. He was sure that the stranger was in no<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_79" name="Page_79">[Pg 79]</a></span> shape to race
after him, and he would lay a muddled trail before he returned to the
cave valley. If this man was a Red plant, he would have to reckon with
one who had already met Kurt Vogel.</p>
<p>The laying of that muddled trail took time. It was past midday when Ross
came back to Ashe, who was sitting up by the mouth of the cave at the
fire, using his dagger to fashion a crutch out of a length of sapling.
He surveyed Ross's burden with approval, but lost interest in the
promise of food as soon as the other reported his meeting in the marsh.</p>
<p>"McNeil—chap with brown hair, brown eyes, a right eyebrow which quirks
up toward his hairline when he smiles?"</p>
<p>"Brown hair and eyes, okay—and he didn't smile any."</p>
<p>"Chip broken off a front tooth—upper right?"</p>
<p>Ross shut his eyes to visualize the stranger. Yes, there had been a
small break on a front tooth. He nodded.</p>
<p>"That's McNeil. Not that you didn't do right not to bring him here
without being sure. What made you so watchful? Kurt?"</p>
<p>Again Ross nodded. "And what you said about the Reds' planting someone
here to wait for us."</p>
<p>Ashe scratched the bristles on his chin. "Never underrate them—we don't
dare do that. But the man you met is McNeil, and we'd better get him
here. Can you bring him?"</p>
<p>"I think he's able to get about, in spite of that leg. From his story
he's been stirring around."</p>
<p>Ashe bit absent-mindedly into a piece of hare and swore mildly when he
burned his tongue. "Odd that Cassca didn't tell us about him. Unless she
thought there was no use causing trouble by admitting they had driven
him away. You going now?"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_80" name="Page_80">[Pg 80]</a></span></p>
<p>Ross moved around the fire. "Might as well. He didn't look too
comfortable. And I'll bet he's hungry."</p>
<p>He took the direct route back to the marsh, but this time no thread of
smoke spiraled into the air. Ross hesitated. That shelter on the small
island was surely the place where McNeil had holed up. Should he try to
work his way out to it now? Or had something happened to the man while
he was gone?</p>
<p>Again that sixth sense of impending disaster, which is perhaps bred into
some men, alerted Ross. Why he turned suddenly and backed against a
bushy willow, he could not have explained. However, because he did so
the loop of hide rope meant for his throat hit his shoulder harmlessly.
It fell to the ground, and he stamped one boot down on it. Then it was
the work of seconds to grasp it and give it a quick jerk. The surprised
man who held the other end was brought sprawling into the open.</p>
<p>Ross had seen that round face before. "Lal of the town of Nodren." He
found words to greet the ropeman even as his knee came up against the
fellow's jaw, jarring Lal so that he dropped a flint knife. Ross kicked
it into the willows. "What do you hunt here, Lal?"</p>
<p>"Traders!" The voice was weak, but it held heat.</p>
<p>The tribesman did not try to struggle against Ross's hold, and Ross,
gripping him by the nape of the neck, moved through a screen of brush to
a hollow. Luckily there was no water cupped there, for McNeil lay in the
bottom of that dip, his arms tied tightly behind him and his ankles
lashed together with no thought for the pain of his burned leg.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_81" name="Page_81">[Pg 81]</a></span></p>
<hr style="width: 35%;"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
